```bash
echo $PATH
```
1. Bash searches the list of paths (given to it by the environment variables).
A path is a way to name the location of a file on your computer
```bash
/usr/bin/echo 
```
A branching tree usr -> bin -> echo
- This is an absolute path
- The relative path is relative to what would be given by `pwd`
`cd` can be read as "change working directory" changing the relative directory. 
## . and ..
```bash
cd ./home
../../../../../bin/echo world
world 
```
- By default a program works on the current working dir
```bash
cd -
```
this toggles to the last working dir
```bash
-a --all
```
flags because they dont take an arg
```bash
-c [?] --color [?]
```
options take an argument

## file flags
```bash 
drwxr-xr-x 1 jon jon 24 Jan 12 12:42 _data
```
read-write-executable--executable-readable--executable
group 1 
usr jon usr jon
`execute` means search, are you allowed to cd into it
```bash
echo hello > hello.txt
cat < hello.txt
hello
cat < hello.txt >> hello2.txt
cat hello2.txt
hello
hello
```

## Pipe
```bash
ls -l / | tail -n1
```
turns out the last line of ls -l

## Root user
he can do w/e he wants he's a super user
sudo "super user do" _do it as the super user_

## `sysfs`
It is a "pseudo" file system that is provided by the linux kernal. It is a way for you to interact with kernal subsystems.  
```bash 
cd /sys
```
these are kernal parameters, it looks like a filesystem. they are devices and classes
```bash
cd /sys/class/backlight
```
this allows you to interact with the backlight 
- I could change the brightness 
```bash
cat max_brightness
1060
sudo echo 500 > brightness 
bash: brightness: Permission denied
```
Perm denied cos the redirection ">" is is not something that the programs know about. the redirection is setup by the shell. Here it is saying - "Run the program `sudo` with the arg echo and 500 and send its output to the file called brightness"
The problem here is that the shell is opening the brightness file, not the sudo program so here in this case the shell which is running as me tries to open the brightness file for writing and its not allowed to do that and therefore you get a permission denied error. 
```bash
# echo 1 > /sys/net...
```
`#` means run this as a root!
`$` indicates we are in a user terminal
`sudo su` 
means "superuser do" as "the shell of the superuser"
```bash
# echo 500 > brightness 
```
no error 
1. But there is a better way to do this, with the pipe 
```bash 
$ echo 1060 | sudo tee brightness 
```
- send the output of echo into the sudo tee brightness 
- tee takes an input and writes it to a file and to stdout
*This is the correct way to do it*

## Exploring the kernal modules
```bash
cd input4\:\:scrolllock/
cat brightness
echo 1 | sudo tee brightness
1
```
*We could write a program to illuminate the scroll lock when we receive an email*

```bash
xdg-open lectures.html
```
this'll open the browser, in theory we could use xdg-open to open any file. 

This lecture covered "the interface" we will be using for the rest of the course. 
Up next: run a program until it fails, bash scripts etc.

Problems:
1. setup instructions
2. create a new directory called `missing` under `/tmp`
```bash
cd ../../tmp
mkdir missing
```
3. Look up the `touch` program. 
```bash
man touch 
```
4. use `touch` to create a new file called `semester` in `missing`
```bash
cd missing
touch semester
```
5.  Write into that file one line at a time
```bash 
echo '#!/bin/sh' > semester
echo 'curl --head --silent https://missing.csail.mit.edu' >> semester
```
6. Try to execute the file
```bash
$ ./semester
... Permission denied
$ ls -l
```
*no execute access*
7. try explicitly with `sh`
```bash
sh semester
```
shebang runs an interpreter directive. The bourne shell runs the interpreter directive for you. The bourne shell runs it at global system level and has privileges that the user may not have. 
8. look chmod
9. make it executable
```bash
chmod +x semester
```
10. 
Use `|` and `>` to write the “last modified” date output by `semester` into a file called `last-modified.txt` in your home directory. ```
```bash
ls -lc | tail -n1 > ~/last_modified.txt
```
11. Write a command that reads out your laptop battery's power level
```bash 
cat /sys/class/power_supply/BAT0/status
```
*This is actually useful because i3/sway does not tell you what your battery level is natively.*


## I used what I just learned to modify my sway config
1. I created a new script file for sway
```bash
$ echo 'battery_status=$(cat /sys/class/power_supply/BAT0/status)' >  ~/.config/sway/status.sh
$ echo 'date_formatted=$(date "+%a %F %H:%M")' >> ~/.config/sway/status.sh
$ echo 'echo $battery_status $date_formatted' >> ~/.config/sway/status.sh
```
2. Then I made a reference to this file in `/.config/sway/config`
```bash
...
bar {
    position bottom
    status_command while ~/.config/sway/status.sh; do sleep 1; done

    colors {
        statusline #ffffff
        background #323232
    }
}
